who's Professor of Health and Physical Education
and has been at Texas A&M since 1972. We're going to
talk about this department primarily and the
impact of changes in at Texas A&M and how it has
affected the college, I mean the Department of
Health and Physical Education. So if we can just
talk to, well from 1972 that you arrived, what are
some of the major things that you have seen happen
And you're talking about the department rather
than the college. Well, both. Because I mean, the
department is an integral part of the college, so
we'll probably be talking about both, but it can be
either. I probably can respond better to the
department. OK, that would be great. All right.
I'll try to do a bunch. All right. I think one of the
major changes that have had impact on the entire
college as well as the department is the
enrollment explosion. When I came in 1972, we had
about 18,000 students, I guess. And for four or
five years after that, we added the equivalent of a
small college, a state college, each year. That's
had major impact on us, I think. Then the other
thing that happened was, as that enrollment grew
larger, the proportion of civilian students,
so-called civilian students, to Corps of Cadets
changed. The Corps still remained a viable force
on this campus. But when I first came here in 1972,
about half of my class would be wearing uniforms,
at least. And now we see one every now and then.
Nobody has mentioned that. That's interesting. I
think that's made, it's allowed some things to
happen. not necessarily for the better, but
different than what they would have evolved had
the Corps continued to be the dominant. Though it
still is a very strong force, it's not the dominant
force it was in 1972 when I came.
I think you have to identify the changing of the
guard at the dean's office as one of the things that
happened that made a difference. Dean Hubert,
when he was Dean, I think it was important for us to
have gone through that period of time with him
because he was a very strong person, had strong
ideas, often domineering and autocratic, but
nevertheless, once you convinced him that
something needed to happen, you could pretty well
count on it happening because he pushed it through
the university in the same fashion. Dean Corrigan
came along though with an entirely different
orientation and a much broader vision of what
education is all about. I'm not sure I want that.
Well, I'm getting that from everybody. It's a
very, very similar type of perception or
observation. And it is. It's leadership style.
It's 180 degree difference. And that's valid.
what I'm hearing is that, you know, we got what we
needed at the time, and then this one was right for
these times, and so change is inevitable, and that
leadership that Hubert had was so necessary. At
the time, I expect that's right, and it was a
materialistic, materialistic
approach to administration, and we were a
military school at that time, almost
exclusively. But even so, Dean Corrigan has
opened up an entirely different way of looking at
things. When you went to, as an administrator,
when you went to Dean Hubert's office, you made
sure that you were well prepared and you rehearsed
and you didn't make any mistakes. Now that was good
in that it made you do your homework. It was bad in
that there was no room for experimenting and
creativity. In Dean Corrigan's case, on the other
hand, nothing is sacred. You can say what's on your
mind. He allows you to experiment with ideas and
thoughts and things. Consequently, I think
creativity is higher than it's ever been because
of that. Another change that occurred, both at the
college and the department level, it was
extremely important at the departmental level,
but it was because of college change that allowed
us to And that is that we began to look at the College
of Education, and this department especially, as
being not just teacher preparation as its
mission. That we were preparing educators not
just for the public schools. That made all the
difference in the world in our program. When did
that come about, more or less? It's hard to say. It
was beginning to happen around 1972 when I came. I
think it was a case of the barrier was beginning to
erode along then. Probably it was 74, 75, or
somewhere along in there before it really was
formalized. And I can't recall the year, but I know
the event. What we introduced was a curriculum in
something we call American Humanics. The
American Humanics was a broad-based program
across campus in which You prepared people for
human services like scout masters and executive
directors of boy scout and girl scout programs and
YMCA programs and things like that, social type
programs. So we began to advertise a program in
which you could get a degree in physical education
and health education and not necessarily be
prepared yourself to teach in public schools.
EDCL, on the other hand, was a little slower in
evolving at that point, but they have evolved at
that point, especially with their graduate
programs. And what's happened there is that
colleges of medicine across the country began to
become real concerned about the kind of teachers
they were. The worst teaching in the world for a
long time was in colleges of medicine. It may still
be, I don't know, but I think it's a lot better. And
here was a group of people who were really
well-versed in pedagogy. And they began to see
themselves as educational directors of colleges
of medicine. And they began to hire those type of
people in colleges of medicine. Several texts
were published on medical education along about
that time. And that made a lot of difference to us
because roughly half our students, our majors
now, are not in teacher preparation. I think
that's important because our field of physical
education has always had more people prepared to
teach than there were room for them to teach. And we
didn't need those many folks. Has the department
been growing steadily still? We've been staying
about the same for the past, oh, seven years, I
guess, maybe eight years. Which is about how many?
About 800 majors. Now that includes, that's
undergrad.
So about 70, that's going to depend on when you
count. It's between 700 and 800 at all times. How
about graduates? I'm going to guess again, but
roughly we have about 200 graduate students. Now,
that includes all of our programs. That's health
education, physical education, and then all the
specializations, which includes exercise
physiology and motor learning. How
have those all been created or come into being? You
know, there's so much diversity in the department
now, and I don't think anybody, until they come and
see this facility, realize the kinds of things
that you're doing. At least I didn't until we saw it
for the Development Council, and that was a real
eye-opener. How do you get that across? How do
people find out that it's here, and then how did it
happen? We suffer from the knowledge curve in that
regard. We still do. Still there are people who
don't know. When they hear the word physical
education, they think basketball and track and
roll out the ball type thing. But it's getting
better. My perception of our reputation on this
campus is that it's very, very good and it's
getting better. And I think to a large extent it's
because of our association with the faculty
senate. When the faculty senate was created, That
forced us into interaction with faculty from
across the campus. Management or
administration, well, administration is not a
good term, but a tool for making final decisions
for the university was done by the old academic
council, which was all department heads and deans
and just a few faculty. So with the coming of the
Faculty Senate, that changed that and threw
faculties together and gave them opportunities
for mutual understanding of one another. And I
think it's been good. If it doesn't do anything
else, I think it's been good for them. Are you part
of the Faculty Senate? Fortunately or
unfortunately, I've been a member of the Senate
since its inception. This is my last year. When was
it started? Let me see. I'm in my sixth year. Let me
see if that's right now. Well, I can check that out.
Maybe the fifth year. Okay. Time flies when you
have fun. I believe it's been five years over
there. Okay. I can count the speakers. There was
McDermott, and then there was Murray Milford, and
then there was John Lonnie, and Sam Black, and now
Dick Chamoy. So there's speakers in the Senate. So
this is the fifth year of the Senate. When would I be
able to get some of the... like, say, minutes or
some of the documents of what's gone on in the
Senate. Are they in the archives? Yes. Patty
Steele is the person in contact. And she's in the
faculty senate office, which is located in the
YMCA, the building that's there. I can file.
Janine, what's a good one for faculty senate
office?
Good one. OK. I imagine that would have some good.
Oh, she'll have everything. Background
information to hang the College of Education
decisions and things on, possibly? I would think
so, at least the most recent decisions. Okay.
Decisions in the last two or three years, in a way.
Is there one, any particular one that you feel have
decisions of the faculty senate that have
affected the College of Education the most? Oh,
the core curriculum. Right. Of course, made an
impact on all of our curriculum. it affected
education less than it did other curricula, like
engineering, for example. Because education has
always had a strong liberal arts background. And
so in our curriculum, for example, we only had to
change a couple of courses, and we were in total
compliance. However, we took that opportunity to
go through a total curriculum revision.
Consequently, we have a curriculum we like a lot
better than we've had in the past. But now, 994 is
beginning to come along, and so we're not sure how
that's going to affect. Okay, and the mission of
the college and of your department, I'm sure, is
still the same as it is for any land grant, which is
the teaching, research, and service. How is that
balanced in your department, the focus? I think in
any research institution, you've got to have a
strong research thrust. If you make me put figures
on that, I would say that research is equally as
important as teaching. And service, or what I
choose to call citizenship, is third in that
category. However, an individual faculty may
have different priorities. For example, I have
faculty that I have designated as being
researcher teachers. They work primarily in the
performance laboratory. And their job is
probably more like 40, 30, 40% research, 30%
teaching, and then 20% service. And then I have
other faculty who are teacher researchers. In
that case, they're heavy responsibilities in
teaching, but they also have to do a legitimate
amount of research. How many do you have on your
faculty? About. It depends on when you ask, but
about,
well, we have 101 faculty and grad assistants. I
just counted those last week. That's headcount
now, not FTE. And about 25 of those, or more like 35
of those, are graduate assistants. So what does
that make? About 70, 76 to 80. Now, a large number of
those, 35 of them, would be lecturers who teach in
our basic activity program. So we have actual
prof-soil-ranked faculty are about 28 to 29. OK.
Is there a lot of collaboration among your faculty
with other departments or even with other
colleges? Quite a bit. A lot of collaboration
within the department, because you've got motor
learning, for example. It's very difficult for
them to do any research without collaborating
with exercise physiology and also with
biomechanics. Those people also collaborate
heavily people in vet school, quite a bit going on
with engineering right now, particularly
between motor learning and engineering, because
a lot of the things we're doing in motor learning
relates directly to engineering. What degree
are, in other words, how are the students Can
students that are in engineering be taking these
classes, or is that a collaboration? Normally
it's through research. It's research
collaboration. However, we do have some
engineering students who take some of our
courses, and of course we take some of theirs. We
take a lot of the veterinary medicine courses, the
exercise physiology people do, because a lot of
the same information that we need is provided
there. In fact, they'll take 14 to 16 hours over
there, their doctoral students will. When did the
doctoral program come into being? Do you know
more? I mean, I've seen it, I just don't. Were you,
was it already in place when you were here? It was in
place when I came. It was around, and I'm going to
have to guess, but it was around 68. But Linus
Dowell, to tell you almost precisely if you know
him, he's on my faculty. Brian Cope, I can get the
same information for you. Now, our health
education doctoral program didn't come into
existence until about 75. And that's a guess, too,
but it'll be within two years. 74 or 75. How about
the view, and you mentioned that a little bit in
passing, about how people don't know about or are
not aware of some of the things that go on. I was
looking at what are the perceptions of outsiders
of the College of Education. And again, sometimes
I even have trouble thinking of you all as the
College of Education because you're over here and
you don't make the connection all the time. What
about people's perceptions outside the college?
Outside the College of Education or even beyond
that, outside in the external environment? Do you
know or have a feel for how do people perceive this
area or this department or its contribution? I
think it's a common mistake often made that People
don't perceive us as being part of education.
There's a lot of common mistakes made. One is they
perceive us as being all activity, and that's all
we do. Of course, that is a major portion of what we
do. I don't want to belittle that. We still think
that's pretty important. Then there's a
misconception that, for example, the folks in
engineering, we're working with our people in our
human performance laboratory, and didn't even
equate human performance laboratory to the
department. And so, you know, you have that kind of
thing going on. With a diversified program,
you've got individual chairs who are leading
those programs who have full freedom because, you
know, I encourage them to take that full freedom to
engage conversation with their components
across campus. And here's two subcomponents that
talk to one another and not know who the parent of
that particular group is. A large university is
really an unstructured thing. When you get right
down to it, it's really a lot of unstructured
stuff. Now, a lot of programs like mine are not in
colleges of education, too. Okay, that might be
the problem. And that may be what you were getting
at. Okay, maybe so. A lot of schools, and I could
name you four or five, have our colleges into
themselves. The University of Maryland is a good
example of the College of Health and Physical
Education. In fact, I think they changed their
name recently, but it's still basically the same
thing. Indiana has that. The University of
Florida has that. Do you think that would ever
happen here?
I don't. I don't foresee it right immediately.
What we would like to see happen is for us to be
recognized as a school within the College of
Education. I've approached Dean Cargan about
this What that would get for us though is as large as
we are and as much responsibility as division
chairs have, they don't get much recognition for
that in terms of reallocated time. They're doing
all that off the corner of the desk. They teach a
full teaching load and then they're managing a
subunit off the side of the desk. If we were
identified as a school, we could have titles, you
know, university-recognized titles in which
they could get some reality of time. So there'd be
some advantage to that. Well, you say they're
working on these off-site, like, give me an
example. Well, Robert Hurley, for example, is a
full professor of health education, and he
teaches a full teaching load. When I say full, it's
not quite a full load, but I'm not able to give him as
much release time to manage the health education
division as I'd like to. So he's, as far as the
university is concerned, he's like any other
faculty member on campus. But he's got about eight
or nine or ten faculty and a student enrollment of
about 300 that he manages. And I can't formally
recognize him for that. And should he leave, I
can't promote someone into his spot and have a
salary increment based on on the administrative
department because the administrative
department doesn't exist as far as the university
is concerned. And if it was a school, that would be
all different. That would help solve it. What's
the dean's reaction? Does he feel that he's...
He's not enamored with it. And I don't really know
why he's... He may see that as a first step toward
breaking off and becoming a separate college. I
personally don't view it that way. It may be
that... that he has information from the
Provost's office that I don't have in terms of the
legitimacy of that. However, I do know that the
College of Business has one program under it that
is a school of accounting or something like that.
I'm not sure what it is. Interesting. To say that we
would never become a college, you just don't know.
But that's not one of the things that we're in.
striving for at this point. We're very happy with
the administrative rank that we have. Well, that
leads me into the next one about the vision for the
future and what you think the College of Education
will be like possibly in, I would say, year 2000 and
beyond maybe. Where do you think we're going? I
think we're going in one of two ways and we sure
better get a handle on it. We've become so
specialized And not just, now we have over here,
but EDCI even has become specialized. We've
become so specialized until we're learning more
and more. Who was it, George Bernard Shaw, that
said we learn more and more about less and less
until we know almost everything about nothing.
I'm afraid that if we aren't careful, we're headed
exactly in that direction.
It's gotten to the point where we're so
specialized until one specialization won't talk
to the other specialization or won't listen to
another because they don't feel they know what
they're talking about. I worry about that. I worry
about it in my fields more than I do about the
college because it's my business to worry about it
right now. But our exercise physiology people,
for example, are becoming so specialized in
exercise physiology until they don't see their
role as the researchers which are supposed to
provide information for the people who are
teaching the activity program to them. They see
themselves as researchers Heaven knows what.
What are we going to do with all that information?
Publishing, maybe? Is there a lot of pressure
still in your department or within the college for
publishing and all that? Do you feel it? Because
some people say it's just within and they put it on
themselves. No.
I do believe that the faculty create most of the
pressure. not for themselves, but for one
another. I think the administrators have a lot
less, are placing a lot less pressure on faculty
groups to publish than are the faculty groups
themselves. Let me give you that example. If I have
Professor A, who has a good teaching record, a
decent publication record,
I feel very strongly that If I could take Professor
A to Dean Cargan, I can make the case that Dean
Cargan would approve him, send him to the provost,
the provost would approve him, and they'd move out
on to the tenure structure. But you run that same
professor through a faculty group, and the
faculty group starts counting publications and
starts applying all kinds of criteria to that
particular person that are perceived more than
real, I think. And consequently, my feeling is
that other faculty are tougher on faculty than the
administration is. And do you have to go through
that process of other faculty before you can go on?
Yes, yes. Through your department. That's right.
However, I can make a recommendation that's
contrary to the committee's recommendation. For
example, the committee might not approve them and
I could send them forward approved, but I also have
to send forward the committee's recommendation
at the same time. Or the committee may approve, and
I could deny. But again, I have to send forward the
committee. Does each department have complete
autonomy on how they handle that tenure? Or are you
pretty much structured? Well, you don't have
complete autonomy, but you have a lot of freedom.
You do have to have criteria spelled out, and it has
to be approved by the dean, and this is where you're
going to operate. And we look amazingly alike. to
someone else we may look amazingly different but I
think given that we look amazing. Now you started
to say that we're going either one of two ways and
one of them was the specialization and one was the
other. Yeah.
The other approach is for us to recognize that
we're becoming so specialized so much so until we
are losing sight of what's really important and
finally redirect ourselves to some type
of organization that makes sense, where there's
good communication between across disciplines
and specializations, and we only decide what
we're all about. What would bring that about the
best? Do you have any ideas? Gosh, if I knew that,
Sylvia, I'd be doing it right now. And that's
tough. Yes, it is. And I'm hearing that from a lot of
people. What I'm trying to do in my department is
make sure that we talk to one another, keep the
groups meeting together and talking together.
And I'm looking for some ways that we can
collaborate our research from the exercise
physiologist to the practitioner. I think the
same thing could happen in other fields in the
college. But let me give you an example. Charlie
Shea is our motor learning instructor. And he's
doing some things in the laboratory that are very
technical and very high level. But one thing he's
learned, it's almost like a spin-off, is that if
you take, and this is going to sound very simple,
but it makes an important thing, if you take a
mallet and try to drive a peg, okay, that you have to
learn how much, and you've got an electronic
device set up so that your force is between two If
you hit it too hard, you've erred. If you haven't
hit it hard enough, you've erred. He's learned
that if you have the same repeated measures in the
same spot, you can soon learn to do that. But then
when you change the parameter, you can't do it. And
so what he's been able to demonstrate in the
laboratory is that the best way to practice that
skill is to hit it from one under one set of
parameters, and then hit it for another set, and
then another set, and then another set. In other
words, vary the parameters constantly. Now, that
has all kinds of ramifications for teaching
physical education activities. And the most
obvious one is in putting a golf ball, for example.
Most people who play golf, to practice putting,
they get a set distance, put four or five balls
down, and put the same stroke, same distance. His
research says that's not a very productive way of
learning the skill. You'd be better off putting it
from one distance, then another distance, and
then a third distance, and so forth. Well, now, why
not take what he's found in the laboratory? Now,
he's demonstrated it in the laboratory, but it
hasn't been demonstrated in the field. But we have
some people teaching activity courses in the
field who could very easily conduct that research
under his guidance. He sets up the parameters.
They'd be the technician, collect the data. The
two of them together write it in. And then you're
building a camaraderie between the two that Well,
and also the fact that you have this laboratory and
that you make it available to people and people
come in and get this test, or at least I think you do,
I know you did. Sure, yeah. Isn't that an excellent
way of... I think so. And are people taking
advantage of that to any extent? They are. To a
large extent, not to the extent that we allow for
them to, but to a large extent. I think the thing
that Dean Cargill tried to set up with the
independent school districts last year is a step
in that direction. You know, health, wellness
weekend type things? Well, no, I was referring to a
meeting we had in the Woodlands, I believe, in
which we brought in researchers from the public
schools to interface with researchers from
higher education on the idea of making theirs
available. Yeah, it's still in progress, isn't
it? I understand there was, I think, Chris Foreman
was in San Antonio for a meeting on that last week.
Good. I think that's a step toward building that
camaraderie, keeping you focused on what you're
all about rather than getting information just
for information's sake. Can we talk just for a few
minutes about highlights and things that you
feel, and there's a little reluctance in people
talking about their own contribution, but what
are some of the things that you feel have been most
meaningful since you have been here? And does
anything stand out in particular? I know there's
been lots of things over such a long time. I think
there's, this is difficult, but there's two or
three things that have happened. Now, whether I
had anything to do with them, I was around when it
happened. One is we were able to get much improved
facilities over what we had. A lot of people
contributed to that. And I happened to be the one
that came along at the right time to organize the
move and finalize the building. But Dr. Landis,
who was probably ahead of me, had worked a long time
to get us in that position. But I think that made a
lot of difference in our program is better
facilities. I think another thing that has
happened that I was involved in was the, this is
going to sound contradictory, considering what I
just said, but the splitting away of health
education and physical education. And that
happened in this department in the 70s, 74, 75. And
I think I had something to do with that, along with
Dr. Hurley, who was on our staff. Until that time,
the program was a health and physical education
curriculum. In other words, someone going
through that curriculum was certified to teach
not just physical education, but also health
education. But what was happening was you were
prepared to teach physical education, and you had
six hours of health, for example, which didn't
prepare you to teach health at all. And by
splitting that apart, I think we now have strong
discipline in physical education and strong
discipline in health education. Is health
education still a requirement in the public
school? Yes. And physical ed, I know. That's
right. At the secondary level of health, we've
lost some of the requirements at the junior high
level. And at the elementary level, it's in the
hands of the self-contained classroom teacher.
Do you have any follow-up system for your students
and how many go into actual teaching and how many
stay? I'm hearing a lot about the retention and how
a lot of people are not staying in the profession
and we're spending a lot of money to educate. Do you
have a feel for that? I don't have a feel for it, but
I've got the system in place to get the feel. We're
in the process right now. About four years ago, we
established a feedback procedure in which we
administer questionnaires to our graduates and
then A year later, we follow up with them. Two years
later, we follow up with them. And then five years
later, we follow up with them. And that data is
coming in, and it has not been analyzed. But we
should be able to have some data.